README.md, before:

Firebird Auto Updater
=====================

What Is It?
-----------

A simple NSIS script for upgrading (installing, reinstalling) a Firebird DBMS client or server for Windows.

I had a task of upgrading Firebird on several hundred client computers and a dozen developer computers, while selecting certain installation options.

To do this, I had to develop a separate solution because for some reason the Firebird developers do not provide any official way to updgrade the installed DBMS (at least, I don’t know about it). It is inconvenient for non-advanced users (well, and advanced ones too) to manually uninstall a previous Firebird client, download the Firebird installer, launch it, and manually set the necessary installer settings.

The user would have to download and run a single exe file that unpacks the official Firebird installer into a temporary system folder, checks for a previous version, uninstalls it, launches the installer, waits for it to complete, and deletes the installer from the temporary folder. I use the Nullsoft Scriptable Installation System (NSIS) for this because it's a tool I'm familiar with.

Along the way, I managed to make it so that Firebird could not only be updated, but also installed if it was not installed previously.

> [!NOTE]
> 1. The script requires the official Firebird setup executable file (e.g. from the official site). After compilation, the setup file will be packaged into the resulting file.
> 2. The setup requires system administrator rights when launched, because this is necessary to install and uninstall the DBMS. At the time of launch, it asks the user to confirm running as administrator (and the user may need to enter an administrator password).

At the time of writing this text, the program has been tested on more than 25 computers running Windows 7, 8, 10, and 11. With the exception of a few [messages from the antivirus and SmartScreen filter](#antivirus-issues), there were no problems with it.

How To Run It As A User?
------------------------

To start installation or update, the user only needs the compiled file `Firebird_update_X_X_X.exe`. There are a couple of command line parameters to use with the executable.

> [!TIP]
> Use `Win + R` to open the `Run` dialog, type `cmd`, and press `Ctrl + Shift + Enter` to launch command line _as an administrator._ If you are using any panel file manager (such as FAR Manager or Total Commander) then you can run the file manager with administrator rights and then type the below commands in the command line. But first, please read the [Antivirus Issues](#antivirus-issues) section.

1. `Firebird_update_X_X_X.exe` without parameters checks the already installed version of Firebird and, if this version is lower than the one specified in the script, removes it and installs a new one. Only the client part is installed, without server components.
2. `Firebird_update_X_X_X.exe /server` performs the same task, but installs the server components.
3. `Firebird_update_X_X_X.exe /force` skips the version checking to force Firebird to be installed.

It is of course possible to combine `/server` and `/force` parameters in any order.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> If you are upgrading your Firebird server, be sure to first back up all your databases located on that computer. And after upgrading the server, restore them so that they get a new on-disc structure (ODS).
>
> This is particularly true for Interbase Expert users who store the program settings in a _IBExpert User Database_ using the default Firebird client library (not the embedded server that is included with Interbase Expert).

How To Compile The Script
-------------------------

Put the official Firebird setup file in the same folder as the script, set the constant values, specifically `FB_VERSION` and `INSTALLER` (explained below), and compile the script using NSIS compiler.

Source Code
-----------

The source code initially was written in Free Pascal then translated to NSIS because some antiviruses (for example, Microsoft Defender) assumed that the compiled exe file is a Trojan software — they [sometimes continue to do this](#antivirus-issues), but less often. And also because NSIS is still better suited for creating installers, of course.

### Requirements

The script requires NSIS compiler 3.08 or later. It uses the `WordFunc` and `FileFunc` extensions that are included in the default NSIS installation.

### Algorithm

At the beginning of the script some constants are defined. I'll explain them later.

1. The script searches for an installed Firebird on the computer. To do this, it looks in the system registry for a link to the folder where the Firebird DBMS is installed (e.g. `C:\Program Files\Firebird\Firebird_3_0`). If the folder is not found, then Firebird is most likely not installed — the program skips steps 2–4 and goes to step 5.
2. If the user specified `/force` command line parameter then skip the steps 3 and 4, go to step 5.
3. If the script contains the `CHECK_GDS32` constant (see below) then it checks for the presence of the file `gds32.dll` in the `Windows\System32` or `Windows\SysWOW64` folder. If the file is not found, go to step 5.
4. The script contains the version of Firebird to install in format 'N.N.', 'N.N.N', and so on. When the installation runs, it tries to extract the Firebird version from `fbclient.dll` library in the Firebird folder. If it fails to get the installed version then install the Firebird (go to step 6). If the version in the configuration file is greater than the installed version then the program needs to remove the installed version and install a new one (go to step 5). Finally, if the version in the configuration file is less than or equal to the installed version, this means there is no need to do anything else (exit the program).
5. The program launches the Firebird uninstaller located in the previously found (step 1) folder and waits for it to complete. It then deletes the Firebird folder with all its contents, since the official uninstaller leaves this folder with some temporary files (an unexpected problem may occur, please read the [Antivirus Issues](#antivirus-issues) section!).
6. The program launches the Firebird installer and waits for it to complete.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Sometimes, after installing a new version of Firebird, you need to restart your computer (as far as I understand, this is usually on those computers where the client DLL was in use by some process at the time of upgrade). This message is generated by the Firebird installer itself, and not by this program; the user can ignore it, but it leads to problems with Firebird.

> [!NOTE]
> A situation may arise when the previously installed Firebird have one bitness (32- or 64-bits), and the official installer in this setup file have a different one. If in step 1 the installer checks the HKLM registry hive, then only the branch with the same bitness as this installer will be checked, and the previos version will not be found. Therefore, we have to check HKLM32 and HKLM64 hives separately.


### The Constants

```nsis
; --- localization ---

; display name to show
!define INST_NAME "Firebird"

; interface language, e.g. for installation progress bar and for the message
; about computer restart (name of the locale file, located here:
; ${NSISDIR}\Contrib\Language files\*.nsh)
!define LANGUAGE "English"

; admin rights warning (if a user launches the installer without administrator
; rights)
!define ADMIN_WARNING "Administrator rights required!"

; --- Firebird configuration ---

; new version to install
!define FB_VERSION "3.0.11"

; is it necessary to check for the presence of gds32.dll in the System folder?
!define CHECK_GDS32 "yes"

; installer exe name (relative path to the installer)
!define INSTALLER "Firebird-3.0.11.33703_0_Win32.exe"

; uninstaller exe name
!define UNINSTALLER "unins000.exe"

; Firebird client installer options:
; * LANG = language abbreviation
; * DIR = installation directory. If this option omitted, the default Program
;   Files folder is used. $1 is a predefined constant that is replaced either
;   by the actual absolute path to the PARENT directory of the previous Firebird
;   installation (if it exists), or by the default Program Files\Firebird path
;   (if it doesn't)
; * GROUP = folder name for the Windows Start menu (you can use the /NOICONS key
;   instead, it prevents this folder from being created, see below)
; * TYPE = installation type
; * COMPONENTS = components to install
; * TASKS = additional tasks, in this example: create the gds32.dll to support
;   legacy applications, then copy it to the Windows\System32 (Windows\SysWOW64)
;   directory
; * SILENT = the installer runs in “silent” mode and does not require user
;   intervention
!define CLIENT_INST_OPTIONS '/LANG=ru /DIR="$1\Firebird_3_0" /GROUP="Firebird \
3.0 (Win32)" /TYPE=clientinstall /COMPONENTS=clientcomponent \
/TASKS=copyfbclienttosystask,copyfbclientasgds32task /SILENT'

; Firebird server installer options (the meaning of the options is the same as
; for the client installer, see above)
!define SERVER_INST_OPTIONS '/LANG=ru /DIR="$1\Firebird_3_0" /GROUP="Firebird \
3.0 (Win32)" /TYPE=serverinstall /COMPONENTS=servercomponent,devadmincomponent,\
clientcomponent /TASKS=usesuperservertask,useservicetask,autostarttask,\
copyfbclienttosystask,copyfbclientasgds32task,enablelegacyclientauth /SILENT'

; uninstaller options: the uninstaller runs in “silent” mode and does not
; require user intervention
!define UNINST_OPTIONS "/SILENT"
```

### How To Obtain The Values Of The ..._INST_OPTIONS Constants

Of course, it’s impossible to come up with the line `TASKS=copyfbclienttosystask,copyfbclientasgds32task` and other things mentioned above on your own. To obtain a list of valid setup program settings, do the following:

1. Manually uninstall the Firebird DBMS if it is installed.
2. Run the installation program with the command line switch `/SAVEINF=filename`, for example:

    `Firebird-3.0.11.33703_0_Win32.exe /SAVEINF=fb_client.inf`.

3. In the installation program interface, select all the necessary options, install Firebird client as usual.
4. A text file with a list of keys that we need will appear in the folder with the installation file (in the example above, this is `fb_client.inf`). Its contents look something like this:
    ```ini
    [Setup]
    Lang=en
    Dir=C:\Program Files (x86)\Firebird\Firebird_3_0
    Group=Firebird 3.0 (Win32)
    NoIcons=0
    SetupType=clientinstall
    Components=clientcomponent
    Tasks=copyfbclienttosystask,copyfbclientasgds32task
    ```
5. The list of keys and their values from it can be used to set the constant CLIENT_INST_OPTIONS value. However, some changes need to be made to this list:
    * enclose the values of the `Dir` and `Group` parameters in double quotes,
    * add a slash to the beginning of each line and replace the equal sign with a space,
    * convert the key names to upper case. I don’t know for sure whether this should be done, but just in case I do it,
    * instead of the `TYPE` key, this file contains `SetupType`, rename it to `TYPE`,
    * change the line `/DIR "..."` to `/DIR "$1\Firebird_..."`, the name of the folder (`Firebird_...`) depends on the major version of Firebird,
    * delete the `NoIcons` line if you want to see the `Firebird` folder in the Windows Start menu. Or, if you write `/NOICONS` there (without `=0`, etc.), it should disable the creation of the `Firebird` folder in the Start menu (and thus make the `/GROUP` key meaningless),
    * be sure to add the line `/SILENT` to the end of the list.

    After all these edits it looks like this:
    ```
    /LANG en
    /DIR "$1\Firebird_3_0"
    /GROUP "Firebird 3.0 (Win32)"
    /TYPE clientinstall
    /COMPONENTS clientcomponent
    /TASKS copyfbclienttosystask,copyfbclientasgds32task
    /SILENT
    ```

    Now combine this into one line separated by spaces and assign to the CLIENT_INST_OPTIONS constant.

6. Follow steps 1 through 5 to install the server and set the value of the SERVER_INST_OPTIONS constant.

Known Issues And Possibly Useful Ideas
--------------------------------------

### Antivirus Issues

Some antivirus programs (namely Microsoft Defender) sometimes falsely flag `Firebird_update_X_X_X.exe` as Trojan software, perhaps because it requires administrative privileges and launches another program (Firebird setup) to make some changes to the OS. Unfortunately, I don't know how to fix this permanently, but there are some observations that may help.

Firstly, my research shows that the problem with the Microsoft Defender sometimes occurs if a user runs the command interpreter `cmd` with administrator rights and then launches this program from it.

Secondly, for unknown reasons, Microsoft Defender sometimes doesn't like it when the line `RmDir /r $0` (after the `uninstall:` label) is present in the script. If you're experiencing a false Microsoft Defender Trojan warning, try removing or commenting out this line.

Additionally, even if Microsoft Defender doesn't detect a false threat, Windows SmartScreen filter may prevent the installation from starting. If you plan on having users download the installation file from a server, be sure to tell them how to allow the program to run.

### Client Or Server Auto-Detect

As for now, the updater cannot determine whether client or server is installed. It would be nice to implement automatic previous installation detection and update the client or server without special command line keys.

I didn't do this because in my particular case, installing the Firebird Windows server was needed much less frequently than installing the client.

Author
------
Copyright (c) 2024, Michael Demidov

Visit my GitHub page to check for updates, report issues, etc.: https://github.com/MichaelDemidov

Drop me an e-mail at: michael.v.demidov@gmail.com

Commit message:

Readme update: Database Users section

README.md, after:

Firebird Auto Updater
=====================

What Is It?
-----------

A simple NSIS script for upgrading (installing, reinstalling) a Firebird DBMS client or server for Windows.

I had a task of upgrading Firebird on several hundred client computers and a dozen developer computers, while selecting certain installation options.

To do this, I had to develop a separate solution because for some reason the Firebird developers do not provide any official way to updgrade the installed DBMS (at least, I don’t know about it). It is inconvenient for non-advanced users (well, and advanced ones too) to manually uninstall a previous Firebird client, download the Firebird installer, launch it, and manually set the necessary installer settings.

The user would have to download and run a single exe file that unpacks the official Firebird installer into a temporary system folder, checks for a previous version, uninstalls it, launches the installer, waits for it to complete, and deletes the installer from the temporary folder. I use the Nullsoft Scriptable Installation System (NSIS) for this because it's a tool I'm familiar with.

Along the way, I managed to make it so that Firebird could not only be updated, but also installed if it was not installed previously.

> [!NOTE]
> 1. The script requires the official Firebird setup executable file (e.g. from the official site). After compilation, the setup file will be packaged into the resulting file.
> 2. The setup requires system administrator rights when launched, because this is necessary to install and uninstall the DBMS. At the time of launch, it asks the user to confirm running as administrator (and the user may need to enter an administrator password).

At the time of writing this text, the program has been tested on more than 25 computers running Windows 7, 8, 10, and 11. With the exception of a few [messages from the antivirus and SmartScreen filter](#antivirus-issues), there were no problems with it.

How to Run It as a User?
------------------------

To start installation or update, the user only needs the compiled file `Firebird_update_X_X_X.exe`. There are a couple of command line parameters to use with the executable.

> [!TIP]
> Use `Win + R` to open the `Run` dialog, type `cmd`, and press `Ctrl + Shift + Enter` to launch command line _as an administrator._ If you are using any panel file manager (such as FAR Manager or Total Commander) then you can run the file manager with administrator rights and then type the below commands in the command line. But first, please read the [Antivirus Issues](#antivirus-issues) section.

1. `Firebird_update_X_X_X.exe` without parameters checks the already installed version of Firebird and, if this version is lower than the one specified in the script, removes it and installs a new one. Only the client part is installed, without server components.
2. `Firebird_update_X_X_X.exe /server` performs the same task, but installs the server components.
3. `Firebird_update_X_X_X.exe /force` skips the version checking to force Firebird to be installed.

It is of course possible to combine `/server` and `/force` parameters in any order.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> If you are upgrading your Firebird server, be sure to first back up all your databases located on that computer. And after upgrading the server, restore them so that they get a new on-disc structure (ODS).
>
> This is particularly true for Interbase Expert users who store the program settings in a _IBExpert User Database_ using the default Firebird client library (not the embedded server that is included with Interbase Expert).

How to Compile the Script
-------------------------

Put the official Firebird setup file in the same folder as the script, set the constant values, specifically `FB_VERSION` and `INSTALLER` (explained below), and compile the script using NSIS compiler.

Source Code
-----------

The source code initially was written in Free Pascal then translated to NSIS because some antiviruses (for example, Microsoft Defender) assumed that the compiled exe file is a Trojan software — they [sometimes continue to do this](#antivirus-issues), but less often. And also because NSIS is still better suited for creating installers, of course.

### Requirements

The script requires NSIS compiler 3.08 or later. It uses the `WordFunc` and `FileFunc` extensions that are included in the default NSIS installation.

### Algorithm

At the beginning of the script some constants are defined. I'll explain them later.

1. The script searches for an installed Firebird on the computer. To do this, it looks in the system registry for a link to the folder where the Firebird DBMS is installed (e.g. `C:\Program Files\Firebird\Firebird_3_0`). If the folder is not found, then Firebird is most likely not installed — the program skips steps 2–4 and goes to step 5.
2. If the user specified `/force` command line parameter then skip the steps 3 and 4, go to step 5.
3. If the script contains the `CHECK_GDS32` constant (see below) then it checks for the presence of the file `gds32.dll` in the `Windows\System32` or `Windows\SysWOW64` folder. If the file is not found, go to step 5.
4. The script contains the version of Firebird to install in format 'N.N.', 'N.N.N', and so on. When the installation runs, it tries to extract the Firebird version from `fbclient.dll` library in the Firebird folder. If it fails to get the installed version then install the Firebird (go to step 6). If the version in the configuration file is greater than the installed version then the program needs to remove the installed version and install a new one (go to step 5). Finally, if the version in the configuration file is less than or equal to the installed version, this means there is no need to do anything else (exit the program).
5. The program launches the Firebird uninstaller located in the previously found (step 1) folder and waits for it to complete. It then deletes the Firebird folder with all its contents, since the official uninstaller leaves this folder with some temporary files (an unexpected problem may occur, please read the [Antivirus Issues](#antivirus-issues) section!).
6. The program launches the Firebird installer and waits for it to complete.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Sometimes, after installing a new version of Firebird, you need to restart your computer (as far as I understand, this is usually on those computers where the client DLL was in use by some process at the time of upgrade). This message is generated by the Firebird installer itself, and not by this program; the user can ignore it, but it leads to problems with Firebird.

> [!NOTE]
> A situation may arise when the previously installed Firebird have one bitness (32- or 64-bits), and the official installer in this setup file have a different one. If in step 1 the installer checks the HKLM registry hive, then only the branch with the same bitness as this installer will be checked, and the previos version will not be found. Therefore, we have to check HKLM32 and HKLM64 hives separately.


### The Constants

```nsis
; --- localization ---

; display name to show
!define INST_NAME "Firebird"

; interface language, e.g. for installation progress bar and for the message
; about computer restart (name of the locale file, located here:
; ${NSISDIR}\Contrib\Language files\*.nsh)
!define LANGUAGE "English"

; admin rights warning (if a user launches the installer without administrator
; rights)
!define ADMIN_WARNING "Administrator rights required!"

; --- Firebird configuration ---

; new version to install
!define FB_VERSION "3.0.11"

; is it necessary to check for the presence of gds32.dll in the System folder?
!define CHECK_GDS32 "yes"

; installer exe name (relative path to the installer)
!define INSTALLER "Firebird-3.0.11.33703_0_Win32.exe"

; uninstaller exe name
!define UNINSTALLER "unins000.exe"

; Firebird client installer options:
; * LANG = language abbreviation
; * DIR = installation directory. If this option omitted, the default Program
;   Files folder is used. $1 is a predefined constant that is replaced either
;   by the actual absolute path to the PARENT directory of the previous Firebird
;   installation (if it exists), or by the default Program Files\Firebird path
;   (if it doesn't)
; * GROUP = folder name for the Windows Start menu (you can use the /NOICONS key
;   instead, it prevents this folder from being created, see below)
; * TYPE = installation type
; * COMPONENTS = components to install
; * TASKS = additional tasks, in this example: create the gds32.dll to support
;   legacy applications, then copy it to the Windows\System32 (Windows\SysWOW64)
;   directory
; * SILENT = the installer runs in “silent” mode and does not require user
;   intervention
!define CLIENT_INST_OPTIONS '/LANG=ru /DIR="$1\Firebird_3_0" /GROUP="Firebird \
3.0 (Win32)" /TYPE=clientinstall /COMPONENTS=clientcomponent \
/TASKS=copyfbclienttosystask,copyfbclientasgds32task /SILENT'

; Firebird server installer options (the meaning of the options is the same as
; for the client installer, see above)
!define SERVER_INST_OPTIONS '/LANG=ru /DIR="$1\Firebird_3_0" /GROUP="Firebird \
3.0 (Win32)" /TYPE=serverinstall /COMPONENTS=servercomponent,devadmincomponent,\
clientcomponent /TASKS=usesuperservertask,useservicetask,autostarttask,\
copyfbclienttosystask,copyfbclientasgds32task,enablelegacyclientauth /SILENT'

; uninstaller options: the uninstaller runs in “silent” mode and does not
; require user intervention
!define UNINST_OPTIONS "/SILENT"
```

### How to Obtain the Values of the ..._INST_OPTIONS Constants

Of course, it’s impossible to come up with the line `TASKS=copyfbclienttosystask,copyfbclientasgds32task` and other things mentioned above on your own. To obtain a list of valid setup program settings, do the following:

1. Manually uninstall the Firebird DBMS if it is installed.
2. Run the installation program with the command line switch `/SAVEINF=filename`, for example:

    `Firebird-3.0.11.33703_0_Win32.exe /SAVEINF=fb_client.inf`.

3. In the installation program interface, select all the necessary options, install Firebird client as usual.
4. A text file with a list of keys that we need will appear in the folder with the installation file (in the example above, this is `fb_client.inf`). Its contents look something like this:
    ```ini
    [Setup]
    Lang=en
    Dir=C:\Program Files (x86)\Firebird\Firebird_3_0
    Group=Firebird 3.0 (Win32)
    NoIcons=0
    SetupType=clientinstall
    Components=clientcomponent
    Tasks=copyfbclienttosystask,copyfbclientasgds32task
    ```
5. The list of keys and their values from it can be used to set the constant CLIENT_INST_OPTIONS value. However, some changes need to be made to this list:
    * enclose the values of the `Dir` and `Group` parameters in double quotes,
    * add a slash to the beginning of each line and replace the equal sign with a space,
    * convert the key names to upper case. I don’t know for sure whether this should be done, but just in case I do it,
    * instead of the `TYPE` key, this file contains `SetupType`, rename it to `TYPE`,
    * change the line `/DIR "..."` to `/DIR "$1\Firebird_..."`, the name of the folder (`Firebird_...`) depends on the major version of Firebird,
    * delete the `NoIcons` line if you want to see the `Firebird` folder in the Windows Start menu. Or, if you write `/NOICONS` there (without `=0`, etc.), it should disable the creation of the `Firebird` folder in the Start menu (and thus make the `/GROUP` key meaningless),
    * be sure to add the line `/SILENT` to the end of the list.

    After all these edits it looks like this:
    ```
    /LANG en
    /DIR "$1\Firebird_3_0"
    /GROUP "Firebird 3.0 (Win32)"
    /TYPE clientinstall
    /COMPONENTS clientcomponent
    /TASKS copyfbclienttosystask,copyfbclientasgds32task
    /SILENT
    ```

    Now combine this into one line separated by spaces and assign to the CLIENT_INST_OPTIONS constant.

6. Follow steps 1 through 5 to install the server and set the value of the SERVER_INST_OPTIONS constant.

Known Issues, Notes, and Future Ideas
-------------------------------------

### Antivirus Issues

Some antivirus programs (namely Microsoft Defender) sometimes falsely flag `Firebird_update_X_X_X.exe` as Trojan software, perhaps because it requires administrative privileges and launches another program (Firebird setup) to make some changes to the OS. Unfortunately, I don't know how to fix this permanently, but there are some observations that may help.

Firstly, my research shows that the problem with the Microsoft Defender sometimes occurs if a user runs the command interpreter `cmd` with administrator rights and then launches this program from it.

Secondly, for unknown reasons, Microsoft Defender sometimes doesn't like it when the line `RmDir /r $0` (after the `uninstall:` label) is present in the script. If you're experiencing a false Microsoft Defender Trojan warning, try removing or commenting out this line.

Additionally, even if Microsoft Defender doesn't detect a false threat, Windows SmartScreen filter may prevent the installation from starting. If you plan on having users download the installation file from a server, be sure to tell them how to allow the program to run.

### Client or Server Auto-Detect

As for now, the updater cannot determine whether client or server is installed. It would be nice to implement automatic previous installation detection and update the client or server without special command line keys.

I didn't do this because in my particular case, installing the Firebird Windows server was needed much less frequently than installing the client.

### Database Users

> [!IMPORTANT]
> This note is intended only for those who are reinstalling the Firebird server.

Since the script completely removes your previous Firebird installation before reinstalling it, be sure to change the SYSDBA password after installation (if you didn't previously use the default password `masterkey`) and possibly re-create other users (if they existed).

If you have any ideas on how to avoid this, please let me know.

Author
------
Copyright (c) 2024, Michael Demidov

Visit my GitHub page to check for updates, report issues, etc.: https://github.com/MichaelDemidov

Drop me an e-mail at: michael.v.demidov@gmail.com
